So if you've been following
through the previous video,
we talked about the binary number system.
You may actually have made
the following two observations.
Firstly, converting from decimal To binary
tedious once you get up above four bits or
eight numbers in the range 0 through 15.
And binary numbers have a lot of numbers
have a lot of digits and writing and
speaking them is both boring and,
more importantly, error prone.
So as a result, programmers very
often use hexadecimal instead.
Hexidecimal, or as it's usually called
X is basic 16 and because 16 is
an exact power of two, converting between
binary and hex is actually quick and easy.
Now once again, I'm gonna point out you
don't need to understand this section
in order to complete
the rest of the course.
So don't feel that if you haven't got
a good understanding of this section that
The next sections are going to get
worse because that's not the case, but
the thing here is that our discussion
of binary wouldn't be complete
without covering hexadecimal.
So if you want to skip
the rest of this video,
and move on to the next
section then please do.
And we'll get back to
regular Python programming.
Look.
You can
also come back to this section
once you've mastered Python, and
you no longer having to
remember loads of new things.
So continuing on.
Hex has got a number of
advantages over binary.
Firstly hex numbers are much shorter and
that makes writing them a lot easier.
For the number 0 through 255 can be
written in just two hex digits and
the number 0 to 65,535
With just four hex digits.
The other thing is that working in hex
provides a convenient way to remain close
to the underlying binary.
And this can be very useful when you're
actually dealing with memory addresses, or
operations that work on individual bits.
And that's like using and or an xor,
which we saw in the previous video.
So moving on to the next slide.
Working in base 16 means that we actually
need a way to represent the 16 digits
from 0 to 15 in the same way that,
in base 10, we had the digits from 0 to 9.
So rather than create 6 more digits to
represent 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15,
th symbols A to F
are actually used instead.
Now each hex digit represents four
binary digits called a nibble.
And seriously, I know it's a weird
name but that's what they're called.
So to represent an 8 bit-byte,
we actually use two hex digits.
So let's go back now and
change the program that we wrote
in the previous video to
print out the numbers in hex.
So I'm gonna shoot back
over to the Intelligo, so
a simple change of we'll just
briefly type it in again.
I've got a new for, so for
i in range 17, and we'll
do our print("
in hex is ".format)
Note that I use x here to
represent hex and hot h.
So, I've actually run this.
You can see the numbers and
the cross pointing value in hex.
So, 0 through nine is
equivalent to decimal.
But once we get to 10, notice how
instead of 10 we went to oi, 11 is ob.
12 is [INAUDIBLE] and so on,
right through to 16, and
16 effectively becomes 10, 1, and 0.
So [INAUDIBLE] partially uses the letter B
in the format stream to represent binary.
We saw that in the previous video when I
used X as I pointed out on the screen,
not H to represent X If you want
to extend the range to 256,
you can actually see how
counting in hex works.
So adding one then carries over
to the next column as a source.
So for example,
1F is 116 plus 15 units, which is 31.
20 and hex is two 16s,
and no units, which is 32.
Now, if a hexadecimal number
contains one of the letters a to f,
it's actually obviously easy
to see that it's a hex number.
But however, the number 20 is
not obviously hexadecimal.
So if we're dealing with hex numbers,
we need some way to identify them as such.
Python along with many other languages
allows or uses the prefix 0x to actually
identify a hex number as the following
simple program we're about to demonstrate.
So I'm gonna type in that so
obviously we can type x=20.
Exit 20, but based on that,
you wouldn't know whether you
meant 20 decimal or 20 hex.
But if I type in 0X 20, that actually
tells Python that we want to actually
type in the hex number for 20.
So y equals 0X0A, and
then we could do a print X, print Y.
Let's do a modification.
Print X times Y So let's run that.
And you can see the results there.
First one, 20, which is actually 32.
So we're asking it to print
out the decimal equivalent.
And y, which was 0x0a,
the equivalent is 10.
And the last one, multiplying them
together So it's basically 32 by 10
effectively, or
20x multiplied by [INAUDIBLE] X, and
that's 320 as a decimal number,
is the actual total in decimals.
And I didn't point it out
in the previous video, but
you can actually specify binary
literals using the prefix ob.
So we could do something like 0b00101010
To actually print out a value in binary.
So if we run that, that would be
the binary equivalent, and or in decimal,
42 is equivalent of that
binary number there.
Now the other thing to point out,
is that leading zeros are not
actually necessary either.
So in other words,
we could have done the same thing here,
we could have just removed those two.
Run it.
We've got exactly the same value.
Hexadecimal addition and
subtraction can actually be performed just
like decimal addition and subtraction.
But with that said there's very few people
these days who actually think in hex.
Now it use when we didn't have modern
programming languages and compilers
that we have these days programmers often
work with machine code or assembler And
you can actually find programs he thought
encountered effectively in hex, but
this is becoming rarer.
I actually, myself,
developed games back in the day and
I didn't actually have an [INAUDIBLE] so
I actually had to deal with hex and
I had to understand how to actually
calculate numbers in hex but
also [INAUDIBLE] what they
actually meant in their values.
So, It's something that you
can certainly learn, but
these days it's not something
you really need to.
So let's swing back now
on to the next slide.
So in this calculation I'm
gonna show you 8A take 4E.
So 8E requires us borrowing
from the next column.
So we actually borrow 16.
Now, at this point,
most people would probably add 16 to 10.
Or A and Hex to give 26.
So, taking away E which is 14 leaves 12
and so we have c in the first column.
Seven take four leaves
three in the second column.
So, the answer is three c in hex or
60 in decimal.
So if you had to perform addition and
subtraction in Hex
without using a calculator, it's natural
to convert the digits to decimal.
Now the standard calculators that
come with Windows, Linux and
the Mac all have an advanced mode
that can perform Hex arithmetic, and
you see how easy it is to do it in Python,
so Now frankly there's no real reason for
risking errors by performing
these calculations yourself.
So in Windows there's a couple of options.
There's either a scientific
option under the view menu or
in Windows 10 it's got a programmer
mode in the settings menu.
On the Mac, there's a programmer
mode under the view menu.
And under Ubuntu Linux, there's also
a programmer mode under the mode menu.
So there's a few options if you
do actually wanna go in and
check out the calculator and try it out.
It's actually quite useful to do that
just to sort of see how it all works,
but again it's not something you
need to understand fully yourself.
Okay, so moving onto the next slide.
Gonna talk now about Octal.
So Octal have like hexadecimal,
Octal is base 8 and uses the digits 037.
As you've probably expected I'd soon
assume you now understand binary decimal.
And so representing 255 an octal,
we've got three times 64 which is 192,
plus seven times eight which is 56 and
that gives us 248.
Then adding seven to give 255.
So adding one to that we carry one
from the first to second column
Then carry one again from the second
to third column, giving you 400 octal,
which is written as 0 in the lower case
o 400, the little o in other words.
So it's usual to use lower case so
it's not confused with the digit 0.
So Python will allow an upper
case letter O, though But
it's not advisable to actually do that.
so octal is really rarely used these days.
One of the few instances that JP could
come up with was Linux file permissions,
which are three groups of three bits each.
So it's represents the read,
write, and execute permission.
And the first group being the owner's
permission, the next group of three bits,
the group's permission, and
finally The last three bits was
the permission for all users.
I'm just showing you this on a slide.
So each octal digit corresponds to a three
bit binary number, as shown there.
So all seven combinations have been shown,
although not all of them would be used in
practice when specifying file permissions.
So the most common permission is to
allow read and write access to the owner
of the file And read only to everyone
else this will be written as
what's octal number 644 and
that will be written as rw-r--r--.
Again, if that didn't make a lot
of sense to you, that's okay.
You don't really need to know this, it's
more something you can come back to later.
If you're feeling this is a bit
overwhelming, don't give up,
move on to the next section if you're
finding this a little bit difficult.
Okay, so let's go back to IntelliJ So
it's actually time for a challenge.
So we're gonna come up with a challenge to
help you understand binary hex and octals.
I'm gonna close down the run window and
I'm gonna
comment out this code to to say you've
got it there later if you wanna use it.
And I'm gonna paste in
what the challenge is.
Gonna paste in there now.
So here is the challenge.
So when converting a decimal
number to binary, you look for
the highest power of two, smaller than the
number, and you put a one in that column.
You then take the remainder and you repeat
the process with the highest power.
Putting a one in it.
Into the remainder.
And is zero otherwise.
And you keep repeating until you've
dealt with all the powers down to two.
That is one in other words.
So, what we're going to be wanting to
do is writing a program that requests
a number from the keyboard and
then prints out its binary representation.
Now, obviously you could
use a format string.
But, that's not actually allowed for
this challenge because it's too easy.
So, the program should actually cater for
numbers up to 65,535.
Other words 2 to the power of 16 take 1.
And that's a hint here,
you need integer division.
That's the two slashes for integer
division as we've talked about previously
and the modular the percent
to get the remainder.
You also need to use the two stars to
raise one number to the power of another.
For example 2 * * 8 raises
2 to the power of 8.
And that's an optional extra try
avoiding printing leading zeros.
Then once the program is working, modify
it to print Octal rather than binary.
So that's is the challenge,
see how well you go with it.
Go away and try your best with it and
when you're ready to come back and
see what we've come up with, come back and
we'll get started on the code.
Pause the video now and
I'll see you when you get back.
Okay, so how did you get on?
Hopefully you figured it out, or
you managed to get it working, and
let's talk about the solution.
So the way we come up with it was
because the highest number we've got to
deal with is one less than
two to the power of sixteen,
The first number we need to divide
by is 2 to the power of 15.
That is, 32,768.
So we then just keep dividing and
printing a zero or a one as appropriate
before repeating with a remainder and
the next lowest powers of two.
So we therefore need to loop from 15
down to zero to get the powers of two.
So for our solution, what we're about to
do is boot up a list of the powers And
we iterate through the list
to print the digits.
So this could all be done in a single
loop if you wanted to, then.
So let's actually make a start.
We'll make a bit of space here.
Okay, so we're gonna start by
typing powers, create a list.
Powers in empty.
And put for power in range.
15, which is saying this is using the for
loops and stepping and so
forth in previous videos.
I'm gonna do powers.append.
[SOUND] To, power.
[INAUDIBLE]
So that's actually gonna build our lists.
So in other words, what it should be
doing is actually giving us 32,768,
16,384 and right on down to three to one.
I'm gonna actually try that
to see that it's working,
by doing a print [INAUDIBLE].
So let's do that first to
make sure it's working.
And you can see that's working so
that's our list which is
working containing our powers.
So that's good so far.
So let's continue on.
Now what we want to do is allow
the user to talk a number.
So X equal int(input)
Please enter a number.
[SOUND]
And
what we need to do is actually
circle through each of our powers.
So basically eat right through
the list now to print the digits.
To do that you can type for
power in powers.
We're going through the list.
Print x, x being the number that has been
entered by the user, integer division for
power and end equals like so
cuz you want it all on the one
line we don't wanna move to the next
line and we put x to find the remainder.
Power.
So if we actually run this now, and
let's just try to the value ten.
We can see we've got the binary equivalent
of one, zero, one, zero binary.
And of course, working that out,
we've got a zero in the first digit
The right most bit if you
will of the binary number.
We've got a one and
that's the value of two there.
Then moving over we've got over here
the other one and that's two times two,
which is four times two is eight.
So eight plus two is ten.
So you can see our binary converters
actually working just fine.
We mentioned an optional challenge.
So we consider flag once when we
hit a non zero value to print.
And we don't actually want to print
anything until that flag is set.
The way we can do that is we can modify
that here, so power in powers, and
up here we're going to put bit equals x,
integer division divided by power.
And then we'll put if
bit is not equal to zero
printing is equal to true.
Then here, what we'll do is we'll
put if printing [INAUDIBLE]
print, but
instead of doing the division again
we'll just use bit at this point
because we've already done
the integer division on line 43.
Like so and that should now remove
the leading zeros because we're actually
not printing anything until we get
a non zero value the first time.
We're setting printing to true.
Of course it can be good practice printing
equals false before we
start the loop as well.
We run that and
we get to the number ten again.
We're now left with one zero one
zero which is again is the bond
unit of decimal ten minus the zeros,
the leading zeros.
And you look at that and you think that
works, and it mostly does the example I
typed in it does but you should always
test what are called boundary conditions.
Now, these are boundaries that are at
the extreme of allowing importance.
So testing with the highest
number allowed.
65535, so we run it.
65535.
That works fine with all 1's remembering
that that's the maximum number There.
That we're allowed in this conversion.
But, if we run it again and
it's a zero, we get nothing.
And of course zero is
a valid binary number.
So, how do we fix that?
Well, the cure is to alter our tests so
that we're actually setting printing
to true as we can see on line 47.
But we want to actually test that.
Bit is not equal to zero.
Or that we're processing the last power.
In other words, processing the very
last digit if you will on r in binary.
So you can put all power is equal to 1.
First you run that.
Then we type 0, which you get a 0 chart
which is correct cause the last power.
Was calculated correctly and
our condition was actually
executed because the power was one and
we hadn't had a zero up until then.
The 65535 should still work as
you can see on the screen there.
The other you can do if you wanted
to is you can play around with this
looking at line The line where we use 15.
So what we could do here is we could
actually convert this to octal,
our result.
We could change the two here to
an eight because two was for binary.
We could actually change that to an eight
to work in octal if we wanted to.
And for efficiency,
you should also reduce the range.
Because the highest power of 8 we're
now interested in is basically 262,144,
which is greater than the highest
number we're allowing for binary.
So play around with that, as well.
And you can do.
Do something similar by
converting it to octal.
I'm gonna finish this video now but
leave you with something to think about.
So we shouldn't have actually
written any code for this challenge.
The specifications stated that the program
should be coded for numbers up to 65,5-
35, but with that said [INAUDIBLE] which
would happen if a larger number is entered
and there's also an assumption that
the numbers would be positive.
The problem here was
the specification was inadequate.
So, as programmers, we've got a duty of
care to the people we're programming for
and if we give it a specification
that leaves such questions unanswered
then we really need to go back
to whoever produced the spec and
seek clarification before
producing any code.
So that's it I am going
to end the video there.
I hope that's been helpful to you.
We will see you now in the next section.